docs: 0.13 update for `container` plugin guide (#4282)
garden-io/garden: docs/other-plugins/container.md

action, so that Garden will make sure the database is up and running before running the migration job.

Since Garden `0.13` `Test` actions can also be dependencies for any other kinds of actions, e.g `Build`, `Deploy`
and `Run` actions.

One thing to note, is that `Run` actions should in most cases be _idempotent_, meaning that running the same action
multiple times should be safe.

See the [reference](../reference/action-types/Run/container.md#tasks) for all the configurable parameters
for `container Run` actions.

## Referencing from other actions

Actions can reference outputs from each other
using [template strings](../using-garden/variables-and-templating.md#template-string-basics).
For example, `container` actions are often referenced by `helm` actions:

```yaml
kind: Deploy
description: Helm chart for the worker container
type: helm
name: my-app
spec:
  values:
    image:
      name: ${actions.build.my-image.outputs.deployment-image-name}
      tag: ${actions.build.my-image.version}
```

Here we do not need to declare an explicit _build_ dependency on `my-image` like `dependencies: [ build.my-app ]`.

> Instead, we do it implicitly via the references to the `Build` action outputs in `spec.value.image`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we do it implicitly via the references to the `Build` action outputs in `spec.values.image`.
```

title: Container
order: 1
---

# Container

Garden includes a `container` plugin, which provides a high-level abstraction around container-based applications.

The plugin is built-in and doesn't require any configuration.

The corresponding `container` action type can be used to

* [build](../reference/action-types/Build/container.md) container images
* [deploy](../reference/action-types/Deploy/container.md) container-based applications
* [run scripts](../reference/action-types/Run/container.md) inside deployed container-based applications
* [run tests](../reference/action-types/Test/container.md) inside deployed container-based applications

Below we'll walk through some usage examples. For a full reference of the `container` action type, please take a look at
the [reference guides](../reference/action-types).

_Note: Even though we've spent the most time on supporting Kubernetes, we've tried to design this action type in a way
that makes it generically applicable to other container orchestrators as well, such as Docker Swarm, Docker Compose, AWS
ECS etc. This will come in handy as we add more providers, that can then use the same action type._

## Building images

> Following is a bare minimum `container Build` action configuration using the required fields:

Reviewer 2: nit: this sentence could perhaps be revised - the `container Build` feels a bit odd, considering it is in fixed-width (as if a command or piece of config or code) but we do not use that verbatim in the actual configuration

perhaps we could say e.g. "Following is a bare minimum `Build` action using the `container` type:" or something similar?

Reviewer: Agree with suggestion. also differentiates between action kind and `type`. Less confusing 👍

Reviewer: Quite an improvement already. Thanks :)

```yaml
# garden.yml
kind: Build
type: container
name: my-container
```

If you have a `Dockerfile` next to this file, this is enough to tell Garden to build it. However, you can override
the `Dockerfile` name or path by specifying `spec.dockerfile: <path-to-Dockerfile>`.
You might also want to
explicitly [include or exclude](../using-garden/configuration-overview.md#includingexcluding-files-and-directories)
files in the build context.

### Build arguments

You can specify
[build arguments](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/#build-arg)
using the [`spec.buildArgs`](../reference/action-types/Build/container.md#specbuildargs) field. This can be quite handy,
especially when e.g. referencing other `Build` action as build dependencies:

```yaml
# garden.yml
kind: Build
type: container
name: my-container
dependencies: [ build.base-image ]
spec:
  buildArgs:
    baseImageVersion: ${actions.build.base-image.version}
```

Additionally, Garden automatically sets `GARDEN_ACTION_VERSION` as a build argument, which you can use to reference the

> version of action being built.

Reviewer 2: Nit: what is the end-user benefit / feature / capability given here? Maybe add some phrasing (or link to another doc) explaining what this gives you, or how you can use this

Author: I don't know tbh :)

Reviewer 3: I think it's somewhat obvious: you know what's the version of your app in the build process and can use it internally to set versions, render docs or clear caches. I think adding a link to the docker doc is a quick win here https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/#build-arg

Author: Please check https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282/commits/07da07b65ab6a0f9081d4264509ed44a675163b9

we default to the Garden `Build` action version.

You can also set the `--tag` option on the `garden publish` command to override the tag used for images. You can both
set a specific tag or you can _use template strings for the tag_. For example, you can

- Set a specific tag on all published builds: `garden publish --tag "v1.2.3"`
- Set a custom prefix on tags but include the Garden version hash: `garden publish --tag 'v0.1-${build.hash}'`
- Set a custom prefix on tags with the current git branch: `garden publish --tag 'v0.1-${git.branch}'`

{% hint style="warning" %}
Note that you most likely need to wrap templated tags with single quotes, to prevent your shell from attempting to
perform its own substitution.
{% endhint %}

Generally, you can use any template strings available for action configs for the tags, with the addition of the
following:

- `${build.name}` — the name of the build being tagged
- `${build.version}` — the full Garden version of the build being tagged, e.g. `v-abcdef1234`
- `${build.hash}` — the Garden version hash of the build being tagged, e.g. `abcdef1234` (i.e. without the `v-`
  prefix)

## Deploying applications

> The Kubernetes plugins (local or remote) can deploy `container Deploy` actions. You'll find the relevant information

Reviewer 2: Nit: this sentence is also perhaps a bit too internal-technical. Maybe this could be rephrased to something more user-oriented, e.g.
> After your software has been built, you might also want to deploy it somewhere. For this, check out our guide on deploying to Kubernetes using `Deploy` actions

information in [this guide](../k8s-plugins/action-types/container.md) and the full spec in

> our [reference docs](../reference/action-types/Deploy/container.md).

Reviewer 2: (repeating the comment as the text changed a bit before i submitted the comment, making it immediately outdated)

Nit: this sentence is also perhaps a bit too internal-technical. Maybe this could be rephrased to something more user-oriented, e.g.
> After your software has been built, you might also want to deploy it somewhere. For this, check out our guide on deploying to Kubernetes using Deploy actions

## Running tests

> For `container` type, you can define both `Test` and `Run` actions. The two are configured in a very similar way.

Reviewer 2: Here we mention both `Test` and `Run` actions and the fact they are configured in a similar way. However, we only give an example of a `Test` action.

Should provide an example of a `Run` action as well, or at least mention some differences between them to explain the motivation?

Author: Changed this, see https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282#discussion_r1196670393

Here is a configuration example for two different test suites:

```yaml
kind: Test
name: my-app-unit
type: container
build: my-app
spec:
  args: [ npm, test ]

---

kind: Test
name: my-app-integ
type: container
build: my-app
dependencies:
  - deploy.my-app
spec:
  args: [ npm, run, integ ]

```

Here we first define a `unit` test suite, which has no dependencies, and simply runs `npm test` in the `my-app`
container.

The `integ` suite is similar but adds a _runtime dependency_. This means that before the `integ` test is run, Garden
makes sure that `my-app` is running and up-to-date.

When you run `garden test`, we will run those tests. The tests will be executed by running the container with the
specified command _in your configured environment_ (as opposed to locally on the machine you're running the `garden` CLI
from).

The names and commands to run are of course completely up to you, but we suggest naming the test suites consistently
across your different action configurations.

See the [reference](../reference/action-types/Test/container.md) for all the configurable parameters
for `Test` actions of `container` type.

## Running arbitrary workloads

> To run arbitrary workloads, any scripts or jobs, you can use the `Run` action which is defined similarly to the `Test`

Author: Changed this in https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282/commits/2e4b6eb4f403570857d7a281c551d8c768a6f00b

action:

```yaml
kind: Run
type: container
name: my-container
dependencies: [ deploy.my-database ]
spec:
  command: [ rake, db:migrate ]
```

In this example, we define a `db-migrate` `Run` action that executes `rake db:migrate` (which is commonly used for

> database migrations, but you can run anything you like of course). The action has a dependency on `my-database` `Deploy`
> action, so that Garden will make sure the database is deployed before running the migration job.

Reviewer 2: could we simplify this too, maybe
```suggestion
database migrations, but you can run anything you like of course). The action has a dependency on the `my-database` deployment, so that Garden will make sure the database is deployed before running the migration job.
```

> Since Garden `0.13` `Test` actions can also be dependencies for any other kinds of actions, e.g `Build`, `Deploy`

Reviewer 2: actually, see https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282#discussion_r1196621068

> and `Run` actions.

Reviewer 2: On another thought: do we need this sentence at all here? This is in the `Run` section but we are now explaining something about `Test` actions

Author: Removed this in https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282/commits/48869558458a375f64b7fcaf5aabfa0f9b773412

One thing to note, is that `Run` actions should in most cases be _idempotent_, meaning that running the same `Run`
action
multiple times should be safe.

See the [reference](../reference/action-types/Run/container.md#tasks) for all the configurable parameters
for `Run` actions of `container` type.

> ## Referencing from other actions

Reviewer 2: re: previous comment, we could potentially move the sentence here somewhere. Any action kinds can depend on any other actions, etc

Actions can reference outputs from each other
using [template strings](../using-garden/variables-and-templating.md#template-string-basics).
For example, `container` actions are often referenced by `helm` actions:

```yaml
kind: Deploy
description: Helm chart for the worker container
type: helm
name: my-app
spec:
  values:
    image:
      name: ${actions.build.my-image.outputs.deployment-image-name}
      tag: ${actions.build.my-image.version}
```

Here we do not need to declare an explicit _build_ dependency on `my-image` like `dependencies: [ build.my-app ]`.
Instead, we do it implicitly via the references to the `Build` action outputs in `spec.values.image`.

For a full list of keys that are available for the `container` action type, take a look at
the _outputs_ reference
of [`Build`](../reference/action-types/Build/container.md#outputs),
[`Deploy`](../reference/action-types/Deploy/container.md#outputs),
[`Run`](../reference/action-types/Run/container.md#outputs),
and [`Test`](../reference/action-types/Test/container.md#outputs) action kinds.

## Mounting volumes and Kubernetes ConfigMaps

> _Runtime_ `container` actions (i.e. `Deploy`, `Run`, and `Test`) can all mount volumes and Kubernetes Configmaps.

Reviewer 2: Nit: is this sentence a bit too under-the-hood technical as well? Could we say something like

> Volumes and ConfigMaps can be mounted in all `Deploy`, `Run`, and `Test` actions of the `container` type.

Author: Changed this in https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282/commits/5159529d7e2685d7720a977f7d3e0d2d4ac86b09

title: Container
order: 1
---

# Container

Garden includes a `container` plugin, which provides a high-level abstraction around container-based applications.

The plugin is built-in and doesn't require any configuration.

The corresponding `container` action type can be used to

* [build](../reference/action-types/Build/container.md) container images
* [deploy](../reference/action-types/Deploy/container.md) container-based applications
* [run scripts](../reference/action-types/Run/container.md) inside deployed container-based applications
* [run tests](../reference/action-types/Test/container.md) inside deployed container-based applications

Below we'll walk through some usage examples. For a full reference of the `container` action type, please take a look at
the [reference guides](../reference/action-types).

_Note: Even though we've spent the most time on supporting Kubernetes, we've tried to design this action type in a way
that makes it generically applicable to other container orchestrators as well, such as Docker Swarm, Docker Compose, AWS
ECS etc. This will come in handy as we add more providers, that can then use the same action type._

## Building images

> A bare minimum `container Build` action just specifies common required fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following is a bare minimum `container Build` action configuration using the required fields:
```

```yaml
# garden.yml
kind: Build
type: container
name: my-container
```

> If you have a `Dockerfile` next to this file, this is enough to tell Garden to build it. You can also
> specify `spec.dockerfile: <path-to-Dockerfile>` if you need to override the Dockerfile name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a `Dockerfile` next to this file, this is enough to tell Garden to build it. However, you can override the `Dockerfile` name or path by specifying `spec.dockerfile: <path-to-Dockerfile>`.
```

You might also want to
explicitly [include or exclude](../using-garden/configuration-overview.md#includingexcluding-files-and-directories)
files in the build context.

### Build arguments

You can specify

> [build arguments](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/#set-build-time-variables---build-arg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[build arguments](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/#build-arg)
```

The link has been slightly changed to point to correct section.

using the [`spec.buildArgs`](../reference/action-types/Build/container.md#specbuildargs) field. This can be quite handy,
especially when e.g. referencing other `Build` action as build dependencies:

```yaml
# garden.yml
kind: Build
type: container
name: my-container
dependencies: [ build.base-image ]
spec:
  buildArgs:
    baseImageVersion: ${actions.build.base-image.version}
```

> Garden will also automatically set `GARDEN_ACTION_VERSION` as a build argument, so that you can reference the version of
> the action being built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Garden automatically sets `GARDEN_ACTION_VERSION` as a build argument, which you can use to reference the version of action being built.
```

## Using remote images

> If you're not building the container image yourself and just need to deploy an external image, you do not need to
> define a `Build` action. You only need to define a `Deploy` action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're not building the container image yourself and just need to deploy an external image, you can use the `Deploy` action:
```

I think this part `you do not need to define a Build action` can be skipped here.

```yaml
# garden.yml
kind: Deploy
type: container
name: redis
spec:
  image: redis:5.0.5-alpine   # <- replace with any docker image ID
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
Note that if there is a _Dockerfile_ in the same directory as the action configuration, and you still don't want to

> build it, you have to tell Garden not to pick it up by setting `include: []` in your action configuration.

Reviewer: by setting `include` or `exclude`? 🤔

Author: This section was removed in https://github.com/garden-io/garden/commit/64a85fe9b55051ff10838635a16b9a76e72f994d

See the [discussion above](https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282#discussion_r1196440424).

> build it, you have to tell Garden not to pick it up by setting `include: []` in your action configuration.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this section is needed anymore as there's no build action to begin with.

Author: Good catch! Removed it in https://github.com/garden-io/garden/pull/4282/commits/64a85fe9b55051ff10838635a16b9a76e72f994d

{% endhint %}

## Publishing images

You can publish images that have been built in your cluster using the `garden publish` command.

Unless you're publishing to your configured deployment registry (when using the `kubernetes` provider), you need to
specify the `publishId` field on the `container` action's `spec` in question to indicate where the image should be
published. For example:

```yaml
kind: Build
name: my-build
type: container
spec:
  publishId: my-repo/my-image:v1.2.3   # <- if you omit the tag here, the Garden action version will be used by default
```

> By default, we use the tag specified in the `container` action's `spec.publishId` field, if any. If none is set there,
> we default to the Garden `Build` action version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, we use the tag specified in the `container` action's `spec.publishId` field. If none is set,
we default to the Garden `Build` action version.
```

- Set a specific tag on all published builds: `garden publish --tag "v1.2.3"`
- Set a custom prefix on tags but include the Garden version hash: `garden publish --tag 'v0.1-${build.hash}'`
- Set a custom prefix on tags with the current git branch: `garden publish --tag 'v0.1-${git.branch}'`

{% hint style="warning" %}
Note that you most likely need to wrap templated tags with single quotes, to prevent your shell from attempting to
perform its own substitution.
{% endhint %}

Generally, you can use any template strings available for action configs for the tags, with the addition of the
following:

- `${build.name}` — the name of the build being tagged
- `${build.version}` — the full Garden version of the build being tagged, e.g. `v-abcdef1234`
- `${build.hash}` — the Garden version hash of the build being tagged, e.g. `abcdef1234` (i.e. without the `v-`
  prefix)

## Deploying applications

The Kubernetes plugins (local or remote) can deploy `container Deploy` actions. You'll find the relevant information
in [this guide](../k8s-plugins/action-types/container.md) and the full spec in
our [reference docs](../reference/action-types/Deploy/container.md).

> ## Running tests

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a note that these create a new pod and are not executed in the deploy. That means that the dependency on the deploy is also not needed. Kubernetes-exec tests can be used to execute in the existing deployment.

Author: Dependency on `deploy.frontend` is necessary here. The integration tests do some calls to `frontend` endpoints, so the tests will fail if the `frontend` app is not deployed.

Verified that in [`demo-project`](https://github.com/garden-io/garden/tree/0.13/examples/demo-project) example. Tried a cold run
```
gdev run frontend-integ
```
with and without `deploy.frontend` dependency. Got an error in the latter case.

> For `container` action type you can define both `Test` and `Run` actions. The two are configured in a very similar way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For `container` type, you can define both `Test` and `Run` actions. The two are configured in a very similar way.
```
IMO `container` action type part is bit confusing in reading when i read the full line.

Here is a configuration example for two different test suites:

```yaml
kind: Test
name: my-app-unit
type: container
build: my-app
spec:
  args: [ npm, test ]

---

kind: Test
name: my-app-integ
type: container
build: my-app
dependencies:
  - deploy.my-app
spec:
  args: [ npm, run, integ ]

```

Here we first define a `unit` test suite, which has no dependencies, and simply runs `npm test` in the `my-app`
container.

The `integ` suite is similar but adds a _runtime dependency_. This means that before the `integ` test is run, Garden
makes sure that `my-app` is running and up-to-date.

When you run `garden test`, we will run those tests. The tests will be executed by running the container with the
specified command _in your configured environment_ (as opposed to locally on the machine you're running the `garden` CLI
from).

The names and commands to run are of course completely up to you, but we suggest naming the test suites consistently
across your different action configurations.

See the [reference](../reference/action-types/Test/container.md) for all the configurable parameters
for `container Test` actions.

> ## Running arbitrary scripts and jobs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running arbitrary workloads
```

> `Run` actons are defined very similarly to `Test` actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run arbitrary workloads, any scripts or jobs, you can use the `Run` action which is defined similarly to the `Test` action:
```

```yaml
kind: Run
type: container
name: my-container
dependencies: [ deploy.my-database ]
spec:
  command: [ rake, db:migrate ]
```

In this example, we define a `db-migrate` `Run` action that executes `rake db:migrate` (which is commonly used for
database migrations, but you can run anything you like of course). The action has a dependency on `my-database` `Deploy`

> action, so that Garden will make sure the database is up and running before running the migration job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
action, so that Garden will make sure the database is deployed before running the migration job.
```

Since Garden `0.13` `Test` actions can also be dependencies for any other kinds of actions, e.g `Build`, `Deploy`
and `Run` actions.

> One thing to note, is that `Run` actions should in most cases be _idempotent_, meaning that running the same action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing to note, is that `Run` actions should in most cases be _idempotent_, meaning that running the same `Run` action
```
